And we felt, you know what? We should go off and do some traveling because you never know what’s going to happen to you. So we basically spent about five months planning a trip and we then left in January 2006 and went on a six month round the world trip. There were lots of different places. We traveled on lots of different modes of transport. And one of those was the Trans-Siberian.
Joanna Penn: Wow. That is a big thing. So you weren’t actually in the London bombings?
Susi Holliday: We were just there and then my sisters were coming down to visit me that weekend and they got turned away. Their train got turned away on the way down. It was stopped and they were taken back. My brother was running around on his scooter and going to Kings Cross and things like that all day.
And it just made me think that anything could have happened. I was lucky that nothing did happen to me or anyone close to me, but it just gave me a bit of a jolt about life and made me think I want to do something. And so travel was the thing.
Joanna Penn: That’s really interesting about travel.Why is it that when we have an experience like that, when we come up against our mortality, why do we want to travel?
Maybe it’s a personality type as I am obviously the same.Susi Holliday: It’s a weird one, isn’t it? Because one of the first things that one of my flatmates said to me when I said I was doing this trip, she said, “Oh, well, be careful. Anything could happen.” And I said this is the whole point. Anything could happen. And it could happen anywhere.
I think you put things off and you think, Oh, I’ll take a trip one day, or I’ll go on that holiday and I’ll do this and I’ll do that. And that day never comes because you get sucked into work and life and everything else that you’re doing, and it doesn’t happen.
So I think, when you are faced with something like that, it makes you re-evaluate things and you think, would I regret it if I’d never did this? Taking the time off work to do something big and bold and go around the world.
And I think the answer was yes, we would. So what’s what we decided to do. Ever since then it’s been a thing that we do. We try and go as many trips as we can and go to many different places and have many different experiences. I have that thing in the back of my mind of, you might never get this chance. It’s weird. I know you do the same.
Joanna Penn: Some people want to stay home and bolt the doors and other people want to get out there and see the world. I think that’s fantastic. But then, okay, so for six months you traveled around the world. Six months is not actually that long when you think about the size of the world.
So why choose the Trans-Siberian Railway? That is an interesting choice.
Susi Holliday: We tried to do like a whole circular trip and so a lot of the times I was trying to avoid just the same old thing of getting a flight everywhere because I think you can see so much more by taking different modes of transport.
So we took some boats and different things, and then we said we’d do a few trains. We did trains in other countries, but I’d always heard about the Trans-Siberian and didn’t really know much about it. So we decided we’d go for that.
I think it’s about a week if you do it nonstop, but we decided to have a couple of stop-offs. I planned the whole six-month trip around being able to circle back from China that way, back to Europe, via Russia.
So it was a way to make the trip work without lots of back and forth with flights and also just something I felt, this is something you’ve got to do. And it definitely was.
Joanna Penn: Still, I think, an unusual trip. And we’re going to go through some of the stops. So the train stops in Ulaanbaatar, and of course, the book Violet, we should say, follows the protagonists on the railway.
Reading the book, I thought that some of these things might have happened to you. Obviously not all of it, because it is a crime novel, but the train stops in Ulaanbaatar, which is in Mongolia.
Mongolia was always used as one of those middle of nowhere kind of places. But I worked for a mining company for a while and I know things are happening in Mongolia these days.
What was Mongolia like? What stood out about that? Why was it really quite a different place?
Susi Holliday: Like you said, it’s one of those places that it’s almost mythical cause you just think no one’s really gone to Mongolia. It’s not a real place.
I think the difference is when you’re in places like that … we were in Beijing and Shanghai and all these big Chinese cities that are just packed full of people, packed full of modern things mixed with older things. And it’s all hustle and bustle.
Mongolia. Photo by Patrick Schneider on Unsplash And then you come across this desolate land and arrive in Ulaanbaatar, which is so desolate and quite a strange place because it does have that kind of feel of they’re trying to turn it into a real city by having some high rises and some businesses that are there. But it’s not a rich place.
They grow their own food. A lot of stuff gets imported from China. It’s in the desert and it’s just old. It felt to us like they’d started building this city and then they just kind of either gave up or run out of money or I don’t know what. It was all kinds of potholes and wild children running the streets.
It’s got a feel of quite a poor place, but then it has got some flashy or business things popping up. So it was quite a dichotomous place.
I had no idea what to expect really. And even now, I think if I went back, I can’t imagine it would be hugely different.
Joanna Penn: I know some people who work on the big mining project there, and obviously they’ve got mineral wealth and metal, I think, but it’s under the land, so it might take a while, but it’s interesting.
You mentioned that desolation, that desolate landscape, which in my mind is starkly beautiful, but definitely outside most people’s comfort zone.
What is important about getting out of your comfort zone when it comes to travel?
Susi Holliday: I think it’s just if you’re going to be away, and especially so far away, then I think you need to do things that you’re never going to do anywhere else.
I think we’d only been in the city for one night when someone said, ‘you don’t want to hang around here. You want to go on a tour and spend time with a nomadic family.’ And I was like, ‘that sounds great.’
It was again, one of those things where I didn’t really know what to expect, so we just went with it.
And we ended up, there were only four of us and a guide, and we went in this battered old van, which seemed to take forever. It had no suspension. It just seemed to be driving aimlessly across no roads. But the driver seemed to know where he’s going.
